# Whalespotting

1. Fork this repo
    * Click `Fork` in the top-right of the page - this will create a copy of this repo in **your own GitHub account**

2. Clone (download) the repo
    * Go to your newly-created fork of the repo (on GitHub).
    * Click `Clone or download` (the green button on the right).
    * Make sure the page says `Clone with SSH` (rather than `Clone with HTTPS`).
    * Open your git client (e.g. GitKraken) and use this link to clone the repo.  
    Your trainer will able to help you with this.

3. "Cloning the repo" will create a folder on your computer with the files from this repo.  
Open this folder in IntelliJ / Visual Studio Code.

4. Open a command-prompt in this same folder.  
Your trainer can show you how to do this, if you need any help.

5. Run this command to set up the necessary dependencies:  
`poetry install`

6. Copy the `.env-template` file to a new `.env` file. This `.env` file shouldn't ever be committed (and is already included in the `.gitignore`) as it may contain secrets.

7. Make sure you've got PostgreSQL installed. You'll notice that your `.env` file contains POSTGRES config variables. As well as installing Postgres we need to make sure we have a user set up to match that config, with the right permissions to create the database when the app runs. All instructions for this step are in the `Install Postgres` section below. 

8. Run this command to run your code:  
`poetry run flask run`

## Install Postgres

Before you run the app you will need to make sure you've got Postgres installed.

1. Download and install the [PostgreSQL server software](https://www.enterprisedb.com/downloads/postgres-postgresql-downloads) if you haven't already.

2. Make sure you've added Postgres to your PATH (`C:\Program Files\PostgreSQL\<your version number>\bin`).

3. Open the Windows Start menu and search for "pgAdmin". When you start "pgAdmin" for the first time, you'll be asked to set a password for your superuser. You'll need this password in a moment on step 4. 

4. Open a terminal and type `psql -U postgres` - `postgres` is the username of your superuser that you just set the password for. You should be prompted to enter that password, and then see the terminal prompt `postgres=#`. We can now start running some SQL from the terminal.

5. We don't want to run our app with our superuser, so we're going to create a new user just for Whalespotting. To make things simpler, the `.env` file is set up with `whalespotting` set as the server, database, username and password, so we need to set up to match this.

6. From the terminal, type `\du` to see your current list of Postgres users. It's likely you'll just have one (your `postgres` superuser).

7. Now type, `CREATE USER whalespotting WITH PASSWORD 'whalespotting';`. Make sure not to miss the `;` off the end of your SQL commands.

8. If you type `\du` again you should see a new user - `whalespotting` - has been created. They still don't have any privileges though, so they can't create a database, which we need to do for the app to run. To give the user privileges type `ALTER USER whalespotting WITH CREATEDB`. If you run `\du` one last time you should now be able to check that your user `whalespotting` has the `Create DB` role attribute listed next to it.

9. Finally we need to set up a server instance. You can create one in "pgAdmin" by following these steps:
    a. Click 'Add new server' in Quick Links
    b. Fill out the required information for the new server instance.
        - General | name: `whalespotting`
        - Connection | Host name: `localhost`
        - Connection | Username: `whalespotting`
        - Connection | Password: `whalespotting`
        - Leave everything else as the default values (Port, Maintenance database etc.)
    c. Click the "Save" button to create the server instance.

10. Start the server instance by right-clicking on it in the object browser and selecting "Start/Restart Server".

## Migrations

Your migrations will run automatically at run-time to update your database with tables and data.

### Creating new tables in your database

If you add a new model in the `models` directory, it's likely you'll want this to create a table in your database too! If you follow the steps below, your table should be created automatically on app start up (i.e. when you run `poetry run flask run`):

1. Add your model to `models`, for example `models/example.py` would include `class Example(db.Model): ...` which would in turn create the table `example`.
    - It's important to note here that your new class _must_ extend `db.Model`
2. Add your new file to the imports in `migrations/env.py` on line 35.

### Migration Troubleshooting

There are [known limitations](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#what-does-autogenerate-detect-and-what-does-it-not-detect) to Alembic's autogenerated migrations, so if you're having trouble make sure you check the docs linked above as a first stop.

## Whalespotting app users

You should be able to create more users by running the app and visiting `http://127.0.0.1:5000/user/register`

Currently all users are created with the `Member` role. Unless you create a way to do so in your app, the only way to create an `Admin` will be by modifying the database directly.